From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[Music]
President Trump said on Monday that he
would take control of the Washington DC
Police Department and send hundreds of
National Guard troops to the city.
Today we talk with Devon Barrett about
why the president says this is necessary
and how it fits into his broader
strategy for dealing with democratically
held cities.
It's Tuesday, August 12th.
So Develin, since President Trump took
office, we have seen him deploy the
military for a whole host of reasons.
Securing the southern border, dealing
with protests in Los Angeles, and now it
seems that he wants to deploy federal
agents, including the National Guard,
into DC. So just to start off, could you
tell us what exactly is going on? So,
the president is once again using the
military to try to address what he sees
as a looming domestic crisis. In this
case, crime in Washington DC.
>> We're here for a very serious purpose,
very serious purpose. Something's out of
control, but we're going to put it in
control very quickly like we did on the
southern border.
>> So, Monday morning, he holds pretty
remarkable press conference at the White
House. I'm announcing a historic action
to
rescue our nation's capital from crime,
bloodshed, bedum, and squalor, and
worse.
This is liberation day in DC, and we're
going to take our capital back. We're
taking it back. And the president
announces that he's sending National
Guard troops to Washington DC. And he's
going to send additional federal agents,
whether it's FBI or DEA or others, out
onto the streets as part of this
crackdown on crime that he says is
making the nation's capital unlivable.
Our capital city has been overtaken by
violent gangs and bloodthirsty
criminals, roving mobs of wild youth,
drugged out maniacs and homeless people.
And we're not going to let it happen
anymore. We're not going to take it.
And the president describes the problem
that he says he will fix in pretty
apocalyptic terms, which is that
supposedly street crime and particularly
crimes by juveniles is basically making
it unsafe for law-abiding citizens to to
leave their houses. And it's
embarrassing for me to be up here. You
know, I'm going to see Putin. I'm going
to Russia on Friday. I don't like being
up here talking about how unsafe and how
dirty and disgusting this once beautiful
capital was.
>> And that's essentially how he describes
Washington DC.
>> So today we're
declaring public safety emergency in the
District of Columbia and Attorney
General Pam Bondi who's fantastic is
taking command of the Metropolitan
Police Department as of this moment. So,
what the president described is that the
attorney general, Pam Bondi, will now
essentially be in charge of this federal
operation to wipe out crime in
Washington DC. And what we know as of
right now is that involves roughly 800
National Guard soldiers and about 500
reassigned federal agents. But, you
know, the real strange piece of this,
the thing we really haven't seen before,
because some of this stuff we've seen
before, including in the first Trump
administration, but the real new twist
here, and and the thing I think there
are still a lot of unanswered questions
about is this idea that the federal
government, starting with senior justice
department officials, are now going to
be directing the city's police
department. That is a new and more
aggressive version of Trump's idea of
taking control of cities. And there's a
lot of parts of that we don't know how
they're going to look yet.
>> We're going to take back our capital.
We're going to make it beautiful again,
but we're going to make it more
importantly safe again. It's going to be
so safe. It's going to be a model. And
then we'll look at other cities also.
But other cities are studying what we're
doing. And he also very clearly sent the
signal that other cities should pay
attention to what's happening in DC and
should change their behavior accordingly
so that the federal government doesn't
do similar things to their cities down
the road.
>> We're going to have a safe, beautiful
capital and it's going to happen very
quickly. Thank you all.
>> He's painting quite a dark picture of
the nation's capital. I I don't live
there, but you Develin Barrett do live
there. Is this true what he's saying
about crime? Is it an emergency
situation that he's responding to?
>> So, if you look at the crime stats for
Washington DC, most major categories of
crime are down double digits over the
last year, over the last two years. So,
all these numbers are heading in what
police officials would say are basically
the right direction. But obviously
anyone who lives in a city, you know,
the data is only so reassuring. There's
certainly stories frequently about
crimes in the city that scare people,
carjackings, muggings, but there's
actually one particular crime that I
think it's important to point out here
that sets some of this in motion, and
that is a young guy named Edward Corine.
>> Big balls blooded. the 19-year-old
former Doge staffer beaten by a violent
mob of miners in the nation's capital
and a popular
>> and he had a sort of a funny internet
nickname of big balls. Wow. He worked
for Doge, the Department of Government
Efficiency, part of that Trump effort to
cut down the federal workforce and he
was out on the street in downtown DC
after midnight with a young woman and he
ended up getting assaulted quite badly
by a group of teenagers. Musk says on
social media, Edward ran to defend her
and was severely beaten to the point of
concussion.
>> And most people, they will call 911 and
hope for the best. Not big balls.
>> Two of the kids who allegedly attacked
him have been arrested and charged.
They're 15. Trump seized on this, got
very upset about it.
>> In a lengthy social media post today,
President Trump wrote, "Crime in
Washington DC is totally out of
control." And I think for Trump, an
incident like this only serves to
strengthen his view that he needs to
take major decisive action to, you know,
address this problem.
>> Somebody from Doge was very badly hurt
last night. You saw that. A young man
who was uh beat up by a bunch of thugs
in DC. And either they're going to
straighten their act out in the terms of
government and in terms of protection or
we're gonna have to federalize and run
it the way it's supposed to be run.
>> And the images from that carjacking that
you mentioned of the Doge employee, I
remember seeing them. He looks beaten
and bloody. So to your point, you know,
what is the human reaction to seeing
something like that?
>> Right. Right. And I think that's one of
the reasons why people's feelings about
crime, people's perceptions about crime
are often quite different from what the
data shows. We live in a world now
especially where you can see videos of
people getting in fights on the street.
You can see pictures like the one of
that attack of someone, you know, with a
badly beaten face, blood all over them.
It's sad and and scary to see stuff like
that. And certainly, yes, there is a
carjacking problem in in DC. That's been
true for years. And there's also a
problem of groups of teenagers running
around, particularly in the summer,
breaking the law or causing trouble.
There's also been a long-running debate
over how to deal with homelessness in
the city. But the city's attorney
general says there is no emergency here.
This is not a crisis. This is a city
dealing with crime, which is a problem
that every city has to deal with in one
form or another.
>> So given that DC is kind of in the same
boat as a lot of other major cities in
America, and that things are not getting
any worse and may even be getting better
than just a few years ago. What is the
rationale here for taking over the
police force and bringing in the
military at this moment?
Well, that's really the million-dollar
question that a lot of people are asking
after the president's announcement. Why
now? And why the military? Even if this
is this much of a problem, why is this
the answer?
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Okay, so we've established that there
are issues with crime and quality of
life in DC, but nothing really out of
the norm for cities across the country.
So why bring in the military? And how do
you just bring in the military into a
city that has its own law enforcement?
>> So that's that's a great question. And
one of the ways in which this is a
little hard to explain is that the Trump
administration not that long ago, you
know, late April was touting what it
called a 25% drop in crime in DC just
since they took over the government
>> and they credited that drop of crime to
President Trump and they said, you know,
strong law enforcement is making the
city safe again.
So by their own measure, crime was
dropping. And it's a little strange now
for them to suddenly come back and say,
"Wait, let's just forget what we said
before. Actually, it's out of control,
and we need to send in the military to
fix it." Now, to the question, how can
he do this? What authority does he have
to do this? So this is actually part of
a pattern we we see with the president
in that he often likes to declare
emergencies or crises and in declaring
that decides that only the military or
only a very severe reaction will fix
what he declares to be the crisis or the
emergency of the moment.
>> Right?
>> There are lots of things that the
military does get used for. Sometimes
the National Guard does help in sort of,
you know, emergency relief situations,
but that's not what this is. This is
about declaring a crime emergency. And,
you know, it's the president who is
saying this is an emergency. Again, the
local officials, the the DC attorney
general is saying there is no emergency
here. There is no crisis. But the law
essentially
makes the emergency in the eyes of the
president. M
>> so you know the city government of DC is
all structured around a federal law
that's basically called the home rule
law and one of the sections of that law
says that in a time of emergency the
president can take control temporary
control of the Washington DC police
department. So they're essentially
invoking that section of that law to
take over the Metropolitan Police
Department. The law says you can only do
that for 30 days.
>> So basically because of the uniqueness
of the relationship between DC and the
federal government, he is able to do
this,
>> right? Especially in terms of taking
over the city police department. He does
not have that power when it comes to say
the Los Angeles Police Department. The
law didn't give him that authority. He
just sent in the National Guard instead.
And that is, you know, the subject of an
ongoing legal fight. Do we know what the
specific plans are for the police force
and for the National Guard? Like what
are they actually going to be doing on
the ground?
>> So already we're seeing small foot
patrols of federal agents out and that's
a little different. But what's been
described to me that's going to happen
is they're going to be some federal
agents in what are called fixed posts,
meaning you stand in one place, either a
hightraic place or a high crime place,
and you stand to be observed and to
discourage crime. Others will be
patrolling in vehicles. And the National
Guard will probably be used in some way
to be a very visible public presence.
But keep in mind that National Guard
aren't trained in arrests, aren't
authorized to make arrests. That's not
really what troops do. That's what
police do. By the same measure, federal
agents can't make the same type of small
level street crime arrests that local
police make. So, what's been described
to me is there's already conversations
underway about, well, if you're a
federal agent and you observe some minor
crime being committed, you should detain
the person and call the local cops and
they will come and make a decision about
whether there should be an arrest for
that offense.
>> This is all going to be pretty
complicated organizationally, legally,
politically, all of it. And there's an
important point here which is that this
is not just about crime. This is also
about a whole category of issues that
generally fall under the description of
quality of life issues in a major city.
>> Um a lot of people perceive things like
homelessness and trash in the streets or
drug addicts um passed out on the
streets as additional examples of crime
even though those are really more social
problems. But Trump's whole effort, he
has made clear he also intends to remove
homeless people from the city. How he's
going to do that, we haven't heard any
explanation yet. That sort of work is
more often done by local police when it
happens. But I think one of the things
that's really telling about this move by
the president, it's a huge show of
force. It's a huge essentially flex of
federal power to address not just crime,
which is typically left to the locals to
to deal with, but also quality of life
issues in a major US city.
>> The idea of using federal forces to deal
with homelessness, isn't that something
that the police should do? Like, don't
they have more training than National
Guardsmen in this instance?
>> Absolutely. I I think to apply the most
rational version of this, you would
probably see them using the police
department that they have just taken
federal control of to do that kind of
work. But we really don't know because
they haven't explained it yet. So that
is definitely much more of a police
function, much more of a city government
function.
But look, a lot of what Trump is doing
is he's basically saying, and this has
been a Republican argument, it's not
unique to Trump. He's basically saying
Democrats don't know how to run cities.
we will take control from these
Democrats in this city and run it the
way we want it run.
>> Do we have any sense of how local law
enforcement in DC has reacted to all of
this?
>> Local officials have reacted very
negatively to this decision. The mayor
of the city has called it unsettling and
unprecedented. You know, there's a real
resistance and dislike of this approach.
You know, the mayor also said military
should not be used against our citizens.
That is an argument that has existed in
American politics since the founding of
this country, but obviously she can't
stop them from doing it.
>> Trump suggested in the press conference
that he might expand
this strategy to other cities and I
wonder how possible or likely you think
that is.
>> As a legal matter, it's pretty
difficult. Like we said, there are some
pretty unique features of Washington DC
that allow for the president to do
something like take over control of the
local police department, but he doesn't
necessarily need to take over control of
the local police department to do some
of this stuff. As we saw in Los Angeles,
he sent in troops and he added more
federal agents because he didn't like
how the city was handling the protests
against the immigration raids there.
So, he can do some of these things. He
probably cannot do all of the things in
other cities that he would like to do
here, but that's clearly a warning and,
you know, a statement of how he views
city government in a lot of parts of the
country. Whether he acts on on it and
how much he acts on it, he wasn't
saying. Mhm.
>> Now, this aggressive public push towards
Washington DC specifically is obviously
going to grab a lot of headlines and
it's obviously going to be the subject
of debate and discussion for days to
come as we see exactly how these troops,
these agents, these police are used to
carry out Trump's idea for what should
happen in Washington DC. But it also
comes at a time when the administration
is really fed up with and frustrated by
a lot of headlines about the Jeffrey
Epstein case and when and whether they
will release additional documents from
the files about that case. That is an
issue that has tied the administration
in knots for weeks. And I think this
issue of DC, this issue of crime in DC
and the the and federalizing control of
the DC Police Department will just
dominate headlines for a while now.
>> The answer to this might be obvious, but
it sounds like it is possible that these
federal forces, we don't know what
they're going to be doing. They could be
sitting around not doing that much since
we don't know. That's a possibility. And
this whole endeavor could be kind of a
waste of time. And if that happens, even
though sending in federal forces, as
you've described, is unusual,
why would it be concerning? Is it
concerning? What are people worried
about exactly?
>> If nothing else, this is a tremendous
show of force, right? This is about a
president telling a city
I am taking charge of this situation and
I am going to direct what happens for
let's say a month and if it's solely a
show of force then sure I think you know
you can make an argument that not much
harm came of it and maybe some good came
of it. I think back to when federal
troops were used in the city after the
racial justice protests and a lot of
that effort was frankly standing around.
>> I remember talking to federal agents who
spent their nights, you know, driving
around in cars and they didn't really do
very much but it was believed or or
thought to be a good idea to sort of
calm down the streets.
So there's a world in which the most
tangible result of all this is a bunch
of people in uniforms or people in cop
cars hanging around on the street and
being sort of observable and maybe
deterring crime that way. I think the
worry for a lot of people is one force
for its own sake is a bad idea. to this
is not really anything like an emergency
that requires, you know, federal troops.
And finally, this is not how American
government has historically worked.
Presidents don't try to take over cities
as a general rule. And so that is an
alarming use of power. And one of the
immediate criticisms from a lot of city
officials is that, you know, this is not
a presidential issue. It's not the
president's business to try to make sure
kids aren't robbing people on Ust Street
Northwest on any given night in
Washington DC. But I think that
criticism also speaks to like a real
character trait of Trump as a president,
which is that he often behaves and
thinks about issues not as you know say
a historical president would or even a
governor would. He in some ways he
behaves like he's mayor of the United
States. He likes to reach deep deep into
particular issues and try to make
changes on a particular street or a very
particular subject like for example
homeless tents in parts of Washington
DC. That is not an area historically
that the presidents or even governors
would focus on or pay much attention to.
But here with this president, as we've
seen it a lot of times before, this is a
president who often
thinks and acts more like a mayor than a
president.
And this particular action in Washington
is a classic example of how he operates.
[Music]
Devon Barrett, pleasure having you as a
first time guest. I wish we had a gong
to ring for you, but I'll just say thank
you.
>> Thanks, Rachel.
We'll be right back.
[Music]
Here's what else you need to know.
Today, President Trump signed an
executive order extending the tariff
truce with China by another 90 days. The
tariff, 145% on Chinese goods imported
to the United States, is now set to go
into effect in mid- November.
And Harvard and the Trump administration
are nearing a $500 million settlement
that would restore billions of dollars
in federal funding for the nation's
oldest university.
The deal would require Harvard to spend
the money on vocational and educational
programs and research, satisfying the
school's demand that any settlement not
be paid to the government directly. And
Harvard would also need to continue its
commitments to fighting anti-semitism on
campus, one of the root causes of the
Trump administration's eye.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Diana
Wyn and Mooch Sadi. It was edited by Liz
O Balin and Paige Cowitt with help from
Lexi Dio. Contains original music by Dan
Powell and Marian Lozano and was
engineered by Chris Wood. Our theme
music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben
Lansberg of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]